🌱 ClusterClass proposal: Clean up outdated implementation details by linking the book's page (#7790)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20210526-cluster-class-and-managed-topologies.md

##### ClusterClass

> This ClassClass CRD allows to define a collection of templates that describe the topology for one or more clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ClusterClass CRD allows to define a collection of templates that describe the topology for one or more clusters.
```

The detailed definition of this type can be found at [ClusterClass CRD reference](https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/cluster.x-k8s.io/ClusterClass/v1beta1);

> at high level the new CRD contains

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at high level the new CRD contains:
```

  - Additional attributes to be set when creating the control plane object, like metadata, nodeDrainTimeout, etc.
  - The definition of a MachineHealthCheck to be created for monitoring control plane's machines.
- The definition of how workers machines should look like in a Cluster using this ClusterClass, being composed of:
  - A set of MachineDeploymentClasses, each one with: 
    - The reference to the bootstrap template (e.g. KubeadmConfigTemplate) to be used when creating machine deployment machines.
    - The reference to the infrastructureMachine template (e.g. AWSMachineTemplate) to be used when creating machine deployment machines.
    - Additional attributes to be set when creating the machine deployment object, like metadata, nodeDrainTimeout, rolloutStrategy etc.
    - The definition of a MachineHealthCheck to be created for monitoring machine deployment machines.
- A list of patches, allowing to change above templates for each specific Cluster.
- A list of variable definitions, defining a set of additional values the users can provide on each specific cluster;
  those values can be used in patches. 

> The following paragraph provide some additional context on some of the above values; more info can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following paragraph provides some additional context on some of the above values; more info can
```

To keep the implementation as easy and user-friendly as possible variable definition in ClusterClass is restricted to:
- Basic types: boolean, integer, number, string
- Complex types: objects, maps and arrays
- Basic validation, e.g. format, minimum, maximum, pattern, required, etc.
- Defaulting
    - Defaulting will be implemented based on the CRD structural schema library and thus will have the same feature set 
      as CRD defaulting. I.e., it will only be possible to use constant values as defaults.
  
Note: if you are using clusterctl templating for creating ClusterClass, it will be possible to to inject default values
from environment variables at creation time.

**ClusterClass Patches**

There are two ways to define patches, by providing inline JSON patches in the ClusterClass or by referencing external patches as defined in
 [Topology Mutation Hook proposal](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/main/docs/proposals/20220330-topology-mutation-hook.md).

> However, what is important to notice is that while defining patches, the author can reference both variable values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it's important to notice that while defining patches, the author can reference both variable values
```

At high level the cluster topology is defined by:

- A link to a Cluster Class
- The Kubernetes version to be used for the Cluster (both CP and workers).
- The definition of the Cluster's control plane attributes, including the number of replicas as
  well as overrides/additional values for control plane metadata, nodeDrainTimeout etc. 
  Additionally it is also possible to override the control plane's MachineHealthCheck.
- The list of machine deployments to be created, each one defined by:
  - The link to the MachineDeployment class defining the templates to use for this MachineDeployment
  - The number of replicas for this MachineDeployment as well as overrides/additional values for metadata, nodeDrainTimeout etc.
    Additionally it is also possible to override the control plane's MachineHealthCheck.
- A set of variables allowing to customize the cluster topology through patches. Please note that it is also possible
  to define variable overrides for each MachineDeployments.

More info in [writing a ClusterClass](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/tasks/experimental-features/cluster-class/write-clusterclass.html).

> #### Validation and Defailting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Validation and Defaulting
```

Both the new field in the Cluster CRD and the new ClusterClass CRD type will be validated according to what is specified in the
API definitions; additionally please consider the following:

**ClusterClass**

- It is not allowed to change apiGroup or Kind for the referenced templates (with the only exception of the bootstrap templates).
- MachineDeploymentClass cannot be removed as long as they are used in Clusters.
- It’s the responsibility of the ClusterClass author to ensure the patches are semantically valid, in the sense they
  generate valid templates for all the combinations of the corresponding variables in input.
- Variables cannot be removed as long as they are used in Clusters.

> - When changing variables definitions, the system validate schema changes against existing clusters and blocks in case the changes are 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When changing variable definitions, the system validates schema changes against existing clusters and blocks in case the changes are 
```

  not compatible (the variable value is not compatible with the new variable definition).

Note: we are considering adding a field to allow smoother deprecations of MachineDeploymentClass and/or variables, but this
is not yet implemented as of today.

**Cluster**

> - Variables are defaulted according to what defined in the corresponding ClusterClass definition; After dafaulting is applied, values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Variables are defaulted according to the corresponding variable definitions in the ClusterClass. After defaulting is applied, values
```

    - The reference to the infrastructureMachine template (e.g. AWSMachineTemplate) to be used when creating machine deployment machines.
    - Additional attributes to be set when creating the machine deployment object, like metadata, nodeDrainTimeout, rolloutStrategy etc.
    - The definition of a MachineHealthCheck to be created for monitoring machine deployment machines.
- A list of patches, allowing to change above templates for each specific Cluster.
- A list of variable definitions, defining a set of additional values the users can provide on each specific cluster;
  those values can be used in patches. 

The following paragraph provide some additional context on some of the above values; more info can
be found in [writing a ClusterClass](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/tasks/experimental-features/cluster-class/write-clusterclass.html).

**ClusterClass variable definitions**

Each variable will be defined by providing an Open API schema using a type inspired from the [Open API schema](https://github.com/kubernetes/apiextensions-apiserver/blob/master/pkg/apis/apiextensions/types_jsonschema.go)

> which is embedded in Kubernetes CRDs definition.

Reviewer 2: It might just be me, but this statement is not very clear. It is a little confusing.

How about something like: "Each variable can be defined by providing its own OpenAPI schema definition. The OpenAPI schema used is inspired from the schema used in Custom Resource Definitions in Kubernetes."

At high level the cluster topology is defined by:

- A link to a Cluster Class
- The Kubernetes version to be used for the Cluster (both CP and workers).
- The definition of the Cluster's control plane attributes, including the number of replicas as
  well as overrides/additional values for control plane metadata, nodeDrainTimeout etc. 
  Additionally it is also possible to override the control plane's MachineHealthCheck.
- The list of machine deployments to be created, each one defined by:
  - The link to the MachineDeployment class defining the templates to use for this MachineDeployment
  - The number of replicas for this MachineDeployment as well as overrides/additional values for metadata, nodeDrainTimeout etc.
    Additionally it is also possible to override the control plane's MachineHealthCheck.
- A set of variables allowing to customize the cluster topology through patches. Please note that it is also possible
  to define variable overrides for each MachineDeployments.

More info in [writing a ClusterClass](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/tasks/experimental-features/cluster-class/write-clusterclass.html).

> #### Validation and Defailting

Reviewer: Was somehow fixed in a previous commit :)

> Both the new field in the Cluster CRD and the new ClusterClass CRD type will be validated according to what specified in the
> API definitions; additionally please consider that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both the new field in the Cluster CRD and the new ClusterClass CRD type will be validated according to what is specified in the
API definitions; additionally please consider the following:
```
nit

**ClusterClass**

- It is not allowed to change apiGroup or Kind for the referenced templates (with the only exception of the bootstrap templates).
- MachineDeploymentClass cannot be removed as long as they are used in Clusters.
- It’s the responsibility of the ClusterClass author to ensure the patches are semantically valid, in the sense they
  generate valid templates for all the combinations of the corresponding variables in input.
- Variables cannot be removed as long as they are used in Clusters.
- When changing variables definitions, the system validate schema changes against existing clusters and blocks in case the changes are 
  not compatible (the variable value is not compatible with the new variable definition).

Note: we are considering adding a field to allow smoother deprecations of MachineDeploymentClass and/or variables, but this
is not yet implemented as of today.

**Cluster**

> - Variables are defaulted according to what defined in the corresponding ClusterClass definition; After dafaulting happens, values
>   can be changed by the user only (they are not affected by change of the default value in the ClusterClass).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Variables are defaulted according to what defined in the corresponding ClusterClass definition; After dafaulting is applied, values
  can be changed by the user only (they are not affected by change of the default value in the ClusterClass).
```
nit

- All required variables must exist and match the schema defined in the corresponding variable definition in the ClusterClass.

> - When changing the cluster class in use by a cluster, the validation ensures that the operation cannot change apiGroup or Kind
>   for the referenced templates (with the only exception of the bootstrap templates).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When changing the cluster class in use by a cluster, the validation ensures that the new ClusterClass is compatible, i.e. the operation cannot change apiGroup or Kind
  for the referenced templates (with the only exception of the bootstrap templates).
```

#### Basic behaviors

This section lists out the basic behavior for Cluster objects using a ClusterClass in case of creates and updates. The following examples 
intentionally use resources without patches and variables to focus on the simplest case.

> more info in [writing a ClusterClass](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/tasks/experimental-features/cluster-class/write-clusterclass.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More info in [writing a ClusterClass](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/tasks/experimental-features/cluster-class/write-clusterclass.html)
```
nit

       - name: region
         value: us-east-1
   ```
   **Note**: `controlPlaneMachineType` will be defaulted to `t3.large` through a mutating webhook based on the default value
   specified in the corresponding schema in the ClusterClass.

During reconciliation the cluster topology controller uses the templates referenced in the ClusterClass. 
However, in order to compute the desired state of the InfrastructureCluster, ControlPlane, BootstrapTemplates and 
InfrastructureMachineTemplates the patches will be considered. 
Most specifically patches are applied in the order in which they are defined in the ClusterClass; the resulting

> templates are the used as a input for creating or updating the Cluster as described in previous paragraphs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
templates are used as input for creating or updating the Cluster as described in previous paragraphs.
```

       - name: region
         value: us-east-1
   ```
   **Note**: `controlPlaneMachineType` will be defaulted to `t3.large` through a mutating webhook based on the default value
   specified in the corresponding schema in the ClusterClass.

During reconciliation the cluster topology controller uses the templates referenced in the ClusterClass. 
However, in order to compute the desired state of the InfrastructureCluster, ControlPlane, BootstrapTemplates and 

> InfrastructureMachineTemplates also patches will be considered. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
InfrastructureMachineTemplates the patches will be considered.
```

reconciled with the original templates to ensure consistency over time and to support changing the generated
topology when necessary.

More specifically, the topology controller uses [Server Side Apply](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/) to write/patch topology owned objects;
using SSA allows other controllers to co-author the generated objects.

However, this requires providers to pay attention on lists that are co-owned by multiple controller, for example lists that are expected to contain values from  ClusterClass/Variables, 
and thus managed by the CAPI topology controller, and values from the infrastructure provider itself, like e.g. subnets in CAPA.

In this cases for ServerSideApply to work properly it is required to ensure the proper annotation exists on the CRD

> types definitions, like +MapType or +MapTypeKey.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type definitions, like +MapType or +MapTypeKey.
```

Reviewer: Can we add a link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#merge-strategy here as well?
Just easier to understand for folks with the reference

reconciled with the original templates to ensure consistency over time and to support changing the generated
topology when necessary.

More specifically, the topology controller uses [Server Side Apply](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/) to write/patch topology owned objects;
using SSA allows other controllers to co-author the generated objects.

> However, this requires providers to pay attention on lists that are expected to contain values from ClusterClass/Variables, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, this requires providers to pay attention on lists that are co-owned by multiple controller, foe example lists that are expected to contain values from ClusterClass/Variables,
```
